One step forward, an easier interoperability between Rust and Haskell (#23)
input-output-hk/engineering: blog/2023-01-25-hs-bindgen-introduction.md

> **What's an FFI-safe type?**
>
> `rustc` will complain if a function prefixed by `extern` keyword use as arguments types that are not FFI-safe. FFI-safe types guarantee that a type has a [specified layout](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/type-layout.html) (memory representation) by e.g. having a [`#[repr(C)]`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nomicon/other-reprs.html#reprc) compiler attribute, for the given C call convention.

**To go further:** the memory management strategy is freeing the value is the role of the receiver (which has “ownership” of it). This means that values returned by Rust functions aren't [`dropped`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.Drop.html) by Rust but rather should be [`freed`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base/docs/Foreign-Marshal-Alloc.html) on the Haskell side!

Currently `hs-bindgen` only generates `unsafe` Haskell foreign imports. In the future it could generate `safe` ones too. I invite you to read *[“FFI safety and GC”](https://frasertweedale.github.io/blog-fp/posts/2022-09-23-ffi-safety-and-gc.html)* by Fraser Tweedale or GHC's users guide to understand the differences between `unsafe`/`safe`.

## DevX

> [`cargo-cabal`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/cargo-cabal) is a CLI tool that helps you, in one simple command, turning a Rust crate into a Haskell Cabal library!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`cargo-cabal`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/cargo-cabal) is a CLI tool that helps you, in one simple command, turn a Rust crate into a Haskell Cabal library!
```

> I was heavily inspired by the developer experience that offers [`wasm-pack`](https://rustwasm.github.io/docs/wasm-pack/) or [`maturin`](https://github.com/PyO3/maturin): launched in any Rust project folder, these tools help the user to interactively tweak their `Cargo.toml` package file and generate the build files needed by Node.js `npm` or Python `setuptools`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I was heavily inspired by the developer experience that offers [`wasm-pack`](https://rustwasm.github.io/docs/wasm-pack/) or [`maturin`](https://github.com/PyO3/maturin): launched in any Rust project folder. These tools help the user interactively tweak their `Cargo.toml` package file and generate the build files needed by Node.js `npm` or Python `setuptools`.
```

What `cargo-cabal` actually does is:

* Ask the user to add `crate-type = ["staticlib"]` (or `"cdylib"`, dynamic libraries require an extra [`build.rs`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/cargo-cabal/blob/main/src/build.rs) file that is generated by `cargo-cabal`) to their `Cargo.toml` file;

* Generate a custom `X.cabal` linking `rustc` output as `extra-librairies`, and either a ([`naersk`](https://github.com/nix-community/naersk) and [`haskell.nix`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/haskell.nix) based) `flake.nix` or a [`Setup.lhs`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/cargo-cabal/blob/main/src/Setup.lhs) Cabal build script (to work around this [issue](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/2641)).

**To go further:** `stack` isn't supported yet, but we could easily imagine a `cargo-stack` binary that just wraps a `cargo-cabal --stack` CLI option!

## What's next?

> [`cargo-cabal`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/cargo-cabal) and [`hs-bindgen`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/hs-bindgen) combined are less than 1000 LoC, they also support Rust `#[no_std]` code, and I would be glad to keep them as [KISS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KISS_principle) and modular as possible. But there is still room for improvements, e.g. by adding traits' implementations for more Rust `std` types, or why not supporting `async` functions with [`async-ffi`](https://github.com/oxalica/async-ffi)?!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`cargo-cabal`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/cargo-cabal) and [`hs-bindgen`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/hs-bindgen) combined are less than 1000 LoC, they also support Rust `#[no_std]` code, and I would be glad to keep them as [KISS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KISS_principle) and modular as possible. But there is still room for improvements, e.g., by adding trait implementations for more Rust `std` types, or possibly supporting `async` functions with [`async-ffi`](https://github.com/oxalica/async-ffi)?!
```

Furthermore, It’s also nice to give a sneak peek on what others do for comparison: **OCaml** [allows extensions to be written directly in Rust with no C stubs](https://docs.rs/ocaml), this work was supported from the [OCaml Software Foundation](http://ocaml-sf.org/) and you can find [a basic example project here](http://github.com/zshipko/ocaml-rust-starter). It offers [safe OCaml/Rust interoperability](https://github.com/simplestaking/ocaml-interop), meaning utilities to convert ADTs (Algebraic Data Types) and functions using them.

> It would be delightful to get as far as having custom preludes in Haskell binding code generated that offers Rust type layout in Haskell. E.g. Rust [slices](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch04-03-slices.html) are not an existing concept in C but could be easily represented as an FFI-safe struct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It would be delightful to get as far as having custom preludes in Haskell binding code, that offers Rust type layout in Haskell. For example, Rust [slices](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch04-03-slices.html) are not an existing concept in C but could be easily represented as an FFI-safe struct.
```

> Finally, it’s worth mentioning that there are also proposals to improve the interface between Haskell programs requiring Rust libraries, including this Cabal [RFC](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7906). As a reminder, the implementation proposed here does not provide support for Haskell dependencies in Rust project yet, but there is a previous [unmaintained attempt](https://github.com/mgattozzi/curryrs) by Michael Gattozzi of bringing Haskell runtime support in Rust binaries. We should also keep a close look on the Rust RFC that offers to introduce a `#[repr(interop)]` attribute: [Experimental feature gate proposal `interoperable_abi`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/105586).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, it’s worth mentioning that there are also proposals to improve the interface between Haskell programs requiring Rust libraries, including this Cabal [RFC](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7906). As a reminder, the implementation proposed here does not provide support for Haskell dependencies in Rust project yet, but there is a previous [unmaintained attempt](https://github.com/mgattozzi/curryrs) by Michael Gattozzi to bring Haskell runtime support to Rust binaries. We should also keep a close look on the Rust RFC that offers to introduce a `#[repr(interop)]` attribute: [Experimental feature gate proposal `interoperable_abi`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/105586).
```

> I would like to thank [@hsyl20](https://github.com/hsyl20), [@iquerejeta](https://github.com/iquerejeta) and [@govanify](https://github.com/govanify) for their reviews and for their helpful suggestions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I would like to thank [@hsyl20](https://github.com/hsyl20), [@iquerejeta](https://github.com/iquerejeta), [@govanify](https://github.com/govanify), and [@doyougnu](https://github.com/doyougnu) for their reviews and for their helpful suggestions.
```

> Thanks for reading, feel free to experiment with this Proof of Concept and to provide feedback on GitHub!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks for reading, feel free to experiment with this proof of concept and to provide feedback on GitHub!
```
